2 PREFACE 

Verborum to the Nirukta minus the Quoted Passages with meanings ; 
(4) An alphabetical list of the Quotations occurring in the Nirukta; 
(5) An alphabetical list of the Untraced Quotations occurring in the 
Nirukta ; (6) A list of Vedic Quotations arranged in the order of the 
Samhitās ; (7) A list of the Authorities mentioned by Yāska ; (8) A list 
of Stories related by Yāska ; (9) The Relation of the Nirukta to other 
texts, i.e. a collection of parallel passages from the Brāhmanas, Prati- 
śakhyas, Mahābhāsya, &c. ; (10) An alphabetical list of the etymologies 
to be found in the Nirukta; (11) A list of the Nirukta passages quoted 
by Sāyana. The whole work being embodied in the form of a dissertation 
was presented to, and accepted by, the University of Oxford, for the 
degree of Doctor of Philosophy. Notwithstanding the Statt. Tit. VI, 
Sec. V, § 5. (8), which requires an Advanced Student to publish his thesis 
in extenso before supplicating for the said degree, the Committee for 
Advanced Studies very kindly permitted me — taking into consideration 
the very high cost of printing at present — to publish the Introduction 
alone. I think I need make no apology for bringing out this part only 
at present, in the hope that the rest will follow in course of time. 

If my labours have borne any fruit, it is simply due to the guidance 
which I have received in the course of my work, and which it is my very 
pleasant duty to acknowledge. 

I owe a great debt of gratitude to Professor A. A. Macdonell. The 
inception of this study is, as I have already mentioned, due to his 
suggestion. The whole work was done under his supervision. His guidance 
and encouragement have been of invaluable help to me. And through his 
recommendation the Administrators to the Max Müller Memorial Fund have 
voted a sum of £50 for the publication of my dissertation — my thanks to 
them for this generous help. I am much indebted to Dr. F. W. Thomas 
Librarian, India Office, and to Dr. J. Morison, Librarian, Indian Institute, 
Oxford, for granting me facilities in the use of books, and for their 
readiness to help me in every way whenever I had the occasion to seek 
their advice. I desire to put on record my special thanks to Mr. Madan, 
ex-Librarian of the Bodleian, for permission to work on valuable manu- 
scripts during the dark days of air-raids, when the manuscripts had been 
carefully stored away. Professor A. B. Keith has placed me under great 
