PREFACE 

When I first came to Oxford in the autumn of 1916, I undertook, 
on the suggestion of Professor A. A. Macdonell, to collate the hitherto 
unutilized Nirulda Manuscripts, contained in the Max Müller Memorial 
and the Chandra Shum Shere Collections, and to see if some new light 
could be thrown on the text of the Nirukta. A careful examination of the 
materials at my disposal has led me to the conclusion that the text of 
the Nirukta has been gradually expanded by the addition of short passages, 
chiefly in the etymological explanations which easily lent themselves to 
such interpolations. At present the history of this gradual expansion 
can be traced only down to the thirteenth century A.D. There is a lack 
of reliable evidence going further. But I have reasons to suspect that even 

up to the thirteenth century, the text of the Nirukta has not been handed 
down with a uniform and unbroken tradition. A few remarks of Durga 
scattered here and there in his commentary open up the possibility that 
the interpolators were already busy with their nefarious work. There 
is no doubt that the text had already been tampered with. Thus one 
should be cautious in making Yaska responsible for many passages, and the 
numerous absurd derivations contained therein, now commonly attributed 
to him. All such passages have been pointed out in my edition of the 
text, which sets forth as clearly as possible the history of the gradual 
expansion by means of square brackets and foot-notes. 

 I have also produced, for the first time, a complete English translation 
of the whole of the Nirukta. I have added numerous exegetical and 
critical notes with a view to extract as much information as possible 
from Yaska. And in order to make my work further useful, I have 
also prepared the following Indexes and Appendices: (1) An Index to 
the words of the Nighantu with meanings;] (2) An Index to the words of 
the Quoted Passages occurring in the Nirukta with meanings ; (3) an Index 
A 2
