DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE MANUSCRIPTS                                       9 

Nighantu is separated from the rest. It ends on f. 16, which gives a list 
of the total number of words and Khandas for each adhyāya as follows : — 
Khanda words 
1st 17 412 4th 3 279 

2nd 22 516 5th 6 151 

3rd 30 410 

It is Roth's E, and belongs to the longer recension. 
To these manuscripts, which I have directly collated myself, may be 
added the A and B which were used by Roth (not directly collated by me), 
besides C.D.E.F = W 1, W2, W3, W4, and br,.., …, …,…., and …. used 
by Sāmaśrami, in his edition, published in the Bib. Ind. 

b. Two recensions. 
The manuscripts fall into two distinct groups : M 2, M 3, W 1. W 2, W 3 
and …. form one family group, and M 1, M4, C 1, C 2, C 3, C4, S. W 4 ; 
A, B, E; …,…,……,…, and ….. the other. The former may be called the 
shorter recension, the latter the longer. The chief reason for calling the 
former group the shorter recension is that at the end of every section the 
explanation is more concise than in the other. The latter not only gives 
an extended explanation at the end of every section, but also adds the 
number of the words enumerated in the section. Besides, at the end of 
every chapter, it gives a summary of the sections by quoting the first word 
of every section, and adds the number of the sections in the chapter. In 
many sections the shorter recension gives fewer words. It is difficult to 
decide which of these two represents the original. But as far as the 
longer explanation at the end of every section is concerned, it is quite 
obvious that it is a later addition. The evidence of the manuscripts shows 
that this addition was gradual. For instance, let us take the first section 
of the first chapter. All the manuscripts of the shorter recension agree in 
giving the text as follows: ……………………..:. Manuscript W2 gives the 
number of the section only, i.e. II 1 11, and throughout it follows this method, 
which seems to have been the original one. Gradually a change was 
introduced : along with the number of the section, the number of the words 
in the section was added, and a numerical figure placed immediately before 
the number of the section, as the evidence of manuscripts M 2 and W 3 
indicates, in the first section of the first chapter, II 21 II is placed before 
II 1 II i- e. ……………………… ll21 ll 1 ll In this connexion it is interesting to 
note that manuscripts W 1 and M 3 at first agree with W 2, but gradually 
come round to the side of M 2 and W 3. The next stage of development is 
marked by the incorporation of the numerical word in substitution for the
