14 INTRODUCTION TO THE NIGHANTU 

The third chapter deals with abstract qualities such as heaviness, 
lightness, &c. The arrangement, of course, is not scientific, nor, in many- 
cases, even systematic, but it shows at least an attempt to group the 
words methodically. The compilation of the Nighantu is the earliest 
known attempt in lexicography. In India it marks the beginning of the 
Kośa literature, and later Kośās have sometimes been called Nighantavas. 
The Nighantu contains only a small number of the words of the Rgveda, 
and as it does not contain any explanations of the words collected, in 
Sanskrit or any other language, the modern term ' dictionary ' cannot be 
applied to it, although the Kośās can be so called. It should rather be 
called a vocabulary, which is a book ' containing a collection of words of 
a language, dialect, or subject ' — when ' the words are few in number, being 
only a small part of those belonging to the subject, or when they are given 
without explanation, or some only are explained, or explanations are 
partial '. 

h. The author of the Nighantu. 

Nothing definite is known of the author of the Nighantu. There is 
a vague reference to the time of its compilation in the Nirukta I. 20, 
which attributes the compilation of the Nighantu along with other 
Vedāńgas to a later generation of the sages who had no direct perception 
of dharma  (truth). 

The following two verses occur in the Moksa parvan of the Mahā- 
bhārta, chapter 342. 86, 87 :

वृषौ हि भगवान् धर्म: ख्यातो लोकेषु भारत ।
निघण्टुकपदाख्यानि विद्वि मां वृषमुत्तमम् ॥
कपिर्वराह: श्रेष्ठश्च धर्मश्च वृष उच्यते ।

तस्माद वृषाकपिं प्राह कश्यपो मां प्रजापति: ॥

Some conclude from the second verse that Kaśyapa,1 the Prajāpati, is 
the author of the Nighantu, for the word vrsākapi occurs in the Nighantu. 
It is not safe to build any argument upon such evidence, for supposing that 
Kaśyapa did invent the word vrsākapi he would be the last person to put 
his own word in a list of difficult words like those of the Nighantu. The 
Nighantu is probably not the production of a single individual, but the 
result of the united efforts of a whole generation, or perhaps of several 
generations. 
1 The theory of Kaśyapa 's authorship is indeed absurd, and hardly deserves any mention, 
but as many people in India believe in it, and seriously put it forward, I thought it necessary 
to make a passing reference to it. 
