12 			INTRODUCTION TO THE NIGHANTU 

Roth does not give any various readings for the fourth chapter of the 
Nighantu, although the evidence of the manuscripts as shown in this 
edition proves that there are several such variants. 

There are a few inaccuracies of accent, for instance in III. 13. 
…………………….is accented in manuscripts, but not so in Roth's edition. 

There is, however, a serious omission in IV. 2………………has been omitted 
between………………… and …………….. That the omission is an oversight appears 
from the fact that though this section is stated to contain 84 words, Roth's 
edition has only 83. Yāska explains every word of the fourth and fifth 
chapters of the Nighantu. His evidence is therefore particularly valuable 
for a critical edition of the fourth and fifth chapters. He gives ……………… 
in its proper place and explains it. Both the recensions agree in reading 
…………. between …….: and …………… and the testimony of Devarāja and 
Yāska supports this reading The omission 1 in Roth's edition is thus 
evidently due to an oversight. 

The evidence of Yāska on the fourth and fifth chapters of the Nighantu 
indicates that he follows the longer recension. Thus in IV. 1 the shorter 
recension gives ………….., but Yāska reads ……………… which is also the reading of 
the longer recension. Again………….., which is omitted by the shorter recension, 
is explained by Yāska. In IV. 2 ………… is omitted by the shorter recension, but 
not by Yāska. Devarāja has also followed the longer recension, and this 
choice seems to be followed by a long line of commentators, and is also, as 
Devarāja says, supported by an unbroken tradition in his own family. The 
shorter recension has undoubtedly preserved the original form of the text, 
at least towards the end of the sections, but the weighty testimony of 
Yāska is against it. I have therefore given the text and the order in 
which the words occur in accordance with the longer recension, though at 
the end of every section I have placed side by side the text of both 
recensions.
e. Bib. Ind. edition of the Nighantu. 

Samaśrami's edition of the Nighantu is useful, for besides publishing 
the commentary of Devarāja Yajvan it supplies a much larger number of 
various readings than Roth. But it suffers from the one defect of present- 
ing only Devarāja's reading of the text of the Nighantu. The commentary 
of Devarāja, however valuable as giving the various readings of the 
manuscripts of his time, cannot be made the sole basis of an edition of 
the Nighantu. Moreover, occasionally the text in this edition contains 
words which are not justified either by the evidence of the manuscripts of 
1This was admitted, and later on rectified by Roth himself.
