8 INTRODUCTION TO THE NIGHANTU

कंदोमंजरिमादिता ॥१॥ कथ्यते ॥ प्रथमं छन्द: ॥ गायत्री ॥ उदाहरणानि॰
अगिमीळि ८। ए। ८ पदपंक्ति, &c.

It ends: «fa श्री विप्णुभट्टविरचिता कंदोमंजरी समाप्ता ।

S4.-This manuscript contains five works. 'The first four consist of
the $1]ch Catustaya, of which the first three works are probably written
by the same scribe. The first part gives the SilsG in 6 leaves, the second the
Jyotisa in 4, the third the Chandas in 7 leaves, the fourth the
The first and third were copied in Saka 1665, and the fourth in Saka 1660.
All these four parts are complete in themselves individually, each being
separately numbered. - The name of their former owner is Bhatta Jayani-
rayana of Themti.

The Nighantw consists of 9 leaves. The text is bounded on each side
by a pair of double red lines. It is a neatly-written manuscript, The
accent is marked with red ink. The size of the paper is 937 x 33". For
further details see Cutalogus Codd. MSS. Bib. Bodi., by Winternitz and
Keith, vol. ii, p. 105.

The manuseript belongs to the longer recension, and does not seem to
have been used by Roth.

W 1.-This contains two different manuscripts. - The first is Veddartho-
dipika, a commentary on the Sarvinukramani by Sadgurugisya.

The second is the Nighontu. It begins on f. l v., and ends on f. 10 r.
It is without accent, quite modern, and full of mistakes. It is Roth's F.
It belongs to the shorter recension.

For further details, see Catalogus Codd. MSS, Bib. Bodl., by Winternitz
and Keith, vol. ii, p. 104.

W 2.-This manuscript contains three different works.

I. The first work is the Siksa Catustaya. - It is a continuously-written
manuscript, the four parts ending on f. 8 v., f. 6 v., f. 11 v., and f. 28
respectively. - The Nighan{u is given without accent. It is Roth's C, and
belongs to the shorter recension. For further details see Catalogus Codd.
MSS. Bib. BodlL., vol. ii, p. 104.

W 3. II. This is the second manuscript bound in the volume just
mentioned. It gives the Nighantu in 24 leaves. It is without accent.
The name of the scribe, partially obliterated by yellow pigment, is the

following : fafed i i I
It is Roth's D, and belongs to the shorter recension.
III. The third manuseript is the Anur@kanukraman.
W 4.-This manuscript contains two different works. The first is the
। - Its first three parts are written continuously. - 'The

1 The fifth is the UHarasalkam of the Nirukfa,

 

