THE TITLE OF THE WORK 13

both recensions, or even by that of Devarija himself. For instance, on
p. 236, appears the word HHfdq, which does not exist anywhere; again, on
p. 257, we find Hifgfaa instead of the correct form सांचींवितल्लु
rami seems to have used six manuscripts, from which he gives a number
of various readings in foot-notes, but in the constitution of the text he has
consistently followed Devaraja. - Hence it is not a critical edition, from the
point of view of constituting an independent text of the Nighuntu based on
manuscript evidence.

f. The title of the work.

Sayanicarya in the Rqvedabhasgyubhimika has given the title of
Niruktam to this list of words. He says: अथावबोघे निरपेक्षतया पट्जग्त
यत्रोक्तं तन्निरुक्तम् । गौ: । रमा । ज्मा । कसा । क्षा । क्षमा इत्यारभ्य वसव: । वाजिन: ।
देवपत्न्यो देवपत्म्य इत्यन्तो य: पदानां समाम्नाय: समाम्नातस्तस्मिन् ग्रन्थे पदाथीववो-
च्चाय परापेक्षा न विद्यते . . - . . । तदेतन्निरुक्तं त्रिकाएडम् . . . . काण्ड-
चयात्मक एतस्मिन् ग्रन्थे परनिरपेक्षितया पदार्थस्योक्तत्वात् तस्य ग्रन्थस्य निरुक्तत्वमिति ।

Madhusüdanasvämi, the author of the PrasthGnabkeda has also given
the title of Niruktam to this list of words. Similarly Samagrami follows
Sayana in calling the work Nirultam, although he adds in brackets
(Nighantu). Sayana is evidently wrong in giving the title of Nirukiom
to the Semamnaya, for Yaska distinctly states that it is called Nighaontu.
Namammayah samammatah . . . . tam imam Samamnmayam Nighantava
ityaeaksgate t (N. 1. 1). The list of words can only be called Nighantu, and
it is wrong to call it Niruktam ; the term can be applied only
when some etymological explanations are given. Moreover, all the manu-
seripts call it Nighantu.

g. The division of the Nighantu.

The Nighantw contains five chapters, the first three are called the
Naighantuka Kanda, the fourth the Nuigama Kanda, and the fifth the
Daivata Kanda. In other words it may be said that

the Naighantuka Kanda deals with synonyms ;
the Naigama Kand« deals with homonyms ;
the Daivata Kanda deals with deities.

There is some sort of a prineiple discernible in the arrangement of the
synonyms in the first three chapters. / The first chapter deals with physical
things like earth, air, water, and objects of nature like cloud, dawn, day
and night, &e. The second chapter deals with man, his limbs, like arm,
finger, objects and qualities associated with man, such as wealth, prosperity,
anger, battle, &e.

 

