/
F । .
w s-
"l m
~ » ७

m ~

AQ

N

P R E F A C E

WHEN I first came to Oxford in the autumn of 1916, I undertook,
on the suggestion of Professor A. A. Maedonell, to collate the hitherto
unutilized Nirukte Manuscripts, contained in the Max Muller Memorial
and the Chandra Shum Shere Collections, and to see if some new light

ifrcould be thrown on the text of the Nirwkta. A careful examination of the
॰ट्टुप्ताग्रुप्ष्टार्गृब्र्थ्यऽ at my disposal has led ime to the conclusion that the text of
Hithe Nirukta has been gradually expanded by the addition of short passages,
chiefly in the etymological explanations which easily lent themselves to
such interpolations. At present the history of this gradual expansion
, can be traced only down to the thirteenth century A.D. There is a lack
3 of reliable evidence going further. But I have reasons to suspect that even
- up to the thirteenth century, the text of the Nirukta has not been handed
; down with a uniform and unbroken tradition. A few remarks of Durga
inscattered here and there in his commentary open up the possibility that
the interpolators were already busy with their nefarious work,. There
is no doubt that the text had already been tampered with. Thus one
should be cautious in making Yaska responsible for many passages, and the
änumerous absurd derivations contained therein, now commonly attributed
to him. All such passages have been pointed out in my edition of the
[text, which sets forth as clearly as possible the history of the gradual

15 . l
" exvpansion by means of square brackets and foot-notes.

3 - 1 have also produced, for the first time, a complete English translation
of the whole of the Nirukta. I have added numerous exegetical and
critical notes with a view to extract as much information as possible
from Yaska. And in order to make my work further useful, I have
also prepared the following Indexes and Appendices: (1) An Index to
the words of the Nigkantuw with meanings;] (2) An Index to the words of

the Quoted Passages occurring in the Nirukt« with meanings; (3) an Index
A 2

इ क्य तद cox 3 &
***,. // 4 "tet B
Pom C/C wla $ V 28.

