DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE MANUSCRIPTS 11

Devaräja has frequently given the readings of former commentators
like Skandasvaini, Bhatta Bhaskarami$ra, and Madhava, when he differed
from them. His commentary has therefore the value of a collation of
a number of manuscripts, brought as he says from various parts of the
country, and also of the collation of former commentaries. I have care-
fully examined it and noted all the differences, as the foot-notes to the text
will show.

d. Roth's edition of the Nighantu.

Roth examined the commentary of Devarija, but the manuscripts which
he used were probably defective, so that his results are unsatisfactory.
Often he attributes readings to Devaraja which are not to be found in the

published text of that commentator; for instance (I. 11) the reading HT
is attributed to Devaraja, who actually reads HT:; he also passes over
variants given by Devarä&ja. Devar&ja gives WwWT as a variant for wW4I,
which Roth does not mention. Devaräja gives «T (I. 12) as a
different reading, which Roth again does not notice. Devargja gives HH:
for GH:, which Roth ignores. Other cases are:

I. 14. Roth attributes Tg: to Dev., who reads Teg:, and gives TT:
as a variant.

I. 18. Dev. gives Ratgg: for T&: as the reading of Madhava, unnoticed
by Roth.

I. 13. Dev. gives Ta@: for @a: as another reading, unnoticed by Roth.
I. 14. Roth attributes to Dev., whose actual reading is

I. 15. Dev. reads for SYHT and gives YYH: as the reading of Skan-
dasvami, unnoticed by Roth.

I. 16. Dev. gives HIWufq as another reading for unnoticed by
Roth.

II. 1. Dev. gives YAHA as the reading of Madhava for Tada, Roth does
not notice it.

II. 5. Dev. gives WW«wq: as a different reading for W:, Roth does not
notice it.

II. 7. Dev. gives H: as the reading of Skandasvami also, but he further
gives Yq: as a variant. Roth does not notice it.
II. 7. Dev. gi es Yd: as a variant for d:, Roth does not notice it.

It is unnecessary to multiply instances, for all such cases can be easily
found in my foot-notes to the text of the Nighantu.

 

