DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE MANUSCRIPTS 7

and that now the Nighantu alone survives. It begins on f. 10 r,, and ends
on f. 22 r. The text is bounded on cach side by double red lines. The
accent is marked. The size of the paper is 9" x 44%" ; the number of lines
is 11. It ends: (sic) <fa faget पंचमोध्याय: ॥ शरी तोलभांडेश्चरापेणमस्तु ॥
Tt गंगा प्रसन् ॥

The date Sak. 1875, and the name of the then owner, Gopala Ananda
Sarasvati, are added in a different, probably later, hand. It belongs to the
louger recension.

C 2.-Is the first of five different manuscripts bound in one volume
[e. 62]. It contains the Nighantu in 17 leaves, marking the accent with
red ink in the first «dhkyaya only.

It begins: I श्री गणेशाय नम: ॥ हरि: ऊँ ॥ It ends: (sic) Tha fame

' पंचमोध्याय: ॥ समाप्त: ॥ Neither the date nor the name of the seribe is
given.

The size of the paper is 8%" x 8%". The number of lines on each page
is 7. Ff. 15, 16, 17 are slightly worm-eaten.

It is written in Devanagart characters on paper, and is fairly accurate,
It belongs to the longer recension.

C3-C4.-Are contained in the same volume, each being a
Cutustaya, of which the Nighautu forms a part. The text of each of these
Siksa Cutustaya is written continuously, and is bounded by double red
lines. The size of the paper is 8%" x 4, and the number of lines on each
page is 10. The first two sections of the first adhy@ya are missing in the
first manuseript. - The other manuscript is dated Sumzat, 1852.

Both are written in Devana@gars characters and represent the longer
recension.

The other manuscripts are a SiksG attributed to Panini, and a Siksa
attributed to Yajfiavalkya. The latter begins: (sic) St zit umWTW @a:
याज्ञवल्क्य उवाच व्याख्यास्याम: उदात्तश्चानुदात्तञ्च
तथॆव तत् लक्षणं वर्णयिष्यामि देवतं स्थानमेव च, &c. It ends: afa sit

याज्ञवल्क्यमुनिकृता वाञसनेयीशिक्षा समाप्ता संवत्? so माघमासे . . . . समाप्ता
राम: विश विश विश fa.

Another manuscript bound in the same volume gives in seven leaves
the Siksa of the Sima Veda, attributed to Lomaga. It begins: ऊ नम:
सामवेदाय. It has preserved some old spellings; for instance, it writes

॰वेट् as Tqq.

The last manuscript gives tlie Ch«ndomasjar* in 5 leaves. It begins: (sic)

श्री गणपतये नम: ॥ प्रणम्य विदं पुरुषं छन्द:शास्त्रेषु निञ्चितं । विष्णुभट्टेस्तिदं प्रीतक्तं

 

