DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE MANUSCRIPTS 9

Nighantu is separated from the rest. It ends on f. 16, which gives a list
of the total number of words and KAkandas for each adhyaya as follows :-

Khamndla - words
lst 17 412 4th 3 279
2nd 22 516 5th 6 151
3rd 30 410

It is Roth's E, and belongs to the longer recension.

To these manuscripts, which I have directly collated myself, may be
added the A and B which were used by Roth (not directly collated by me),
besides C.D.E.F = W I, W 2, W383, W4, and #, ख, ग), घ, ङ, and q used
by Samagrami, in his edition, published in the Bib. Ind.

b. Two recensions.

The manuscripts fall into two distinet groups : M 2, M 3, W 1. W 2, W 3
and # form one family group, and M 1, M4, C1, C2, C3, C4, S, W 4;
A, B, E; æ, q, W, g, and 4 the other. The former may be called the
shorter recension, the latter the longer. The chief reason for calling the
former group the shorter recension is that at the end of every section the
explanation is more concise than in the other. The latter not only gives
an extended explanation at the end of every section, but also adds the
number of the words enumerated in the section. Besides, at the end of
every chapter, it gives a summary of the sections by quoting the first word
of every section, and adds the number of the sections in the chapter. In
many sections the shorter recension gives fewer words. It is difficult to
decide which of these two represents the original. But as far as the
longer explanation at the end of every section is concerned, it is quite
obvious that it is a later addition. The evidence of the manuscripts shows
that this addition was gradual. For instance, let us take the first section
of the first chapter. All the manuscripts of the shorter recension agree in
giving the text as follows: गोत्रेति पृथिव्या: Manuscript W 2 gives the
number of the section only, i.e. It 9 II, and throughout it follows this method,
which seems to have been the original one. Gradually a change was
introduced : along with the number of the section, the number of the words
in the section was added, and a numerical figure placed immediately before
the number of the section, as the evidence of manuscripts M 2 and W 8
indicates, in the first section of the first chapter, N34 is placed before
141 ic गोत्रेति पृथिव्या: tsa 41 In this connexion it is interesting to
note that manuscripts W 1 and M 3 at first agree with W 2, but gradually

come round to the side of M 2 and W 8. - The next stage of development is
marked by the incorporation of the numerical word in substitution for the

 

