14 INTRODUCTION TO THE NIGHANTU

The third chapter deals with abstract qualities such as heaviness,
lightness, &e. The arrangement, of course, is not scientific, nor, in many
cases, even systematic, but it shows at least an attempt to group the
words methodically. The compilation of the Nighontu is the earliest
known attempt in lexicography. In India it marks the beginning of the
Kosa literature, and later Koéas have sometimes been called Nighanrtavus.
The Nighuntu contains only a small number of the words of the Rigveda,
and as it does not contain any explanations of the words collected, in
Sanskrit or any other language, the modern term 'dictionary' cannot be
applied to it, although the can be so called. It should rather be
called a vocabulary, which is a book 'containing a collection of words of
a language, dialect, or subject'-when ' the words are few in number, being
only a small part of those belonging to the subject, or when they are given
without explanation, or some only are explained, or explanations are
partial '.

h. The author of the Nighantu.

Nothing definite is known of the author of the Nighuartu. / There is
a vague reference to the time of its compilation in the Nirukts I. 20,
which attributes the compilation of the Nighontw along with other
Vealaigas to a later generation of the sages who had no direct perception
of dharma (truth).

The following two verses occur in the Moksa parvan of the Muhka-
bhiraila, chapter 342. 86, 87 ;

वृषौ हि भगवान् धर्म: ख्यातो लोकेषु भारत ।
निघण्टुकपदाख्यानि विद्वि मां वृषमुत्तमम् ॥
कपिर्वराह: श्रेष्ठश्च धर्मश्च वृष उच्यते ।

तस्माद वृषाकपिं प्राह कश्यपो मां प्रजापति: ॥

Some conclude from the second verse that Kagyapa," the Prajapati, is
the author of the Nighauntu, for the word vrsakapt occurs in the Nighontu.
It is not safe to build any argument upon such evidence, for supposing that
Kasgyapa did invent the word vrs@kapt he would be the last person to put
his own word in a list of difficult words like those of the Nighonutu. The
Nighantu is probably not the production of a single individual, hut the
result of the united efforts of a whole generation, or perhaps of several
generations.

' The theory of authorship is indeed absurd, and hardly deserves any mention,

but as many people in India believe in it, and seriously put it forward, I thought it necessary
to make a passing reference to it.

 

