13 INTRODUCTION TO THE NIGHANTU

Roth does not give any various readings for the fourth chapter of the
Nighantu, although the evidence of the manuscripts as shown in this
edition proves that there are several such variants.

There are a few inaccuracies of accent, for instance in IIL 13.

अग्नि न ये 1ऽ accented in manuscripts, but not so in Roth's edition.

There is, however, a serious omission in IV. 2. has been omitted
between HEHTW: and That the omission is an oversight appears
from the fact that though this section is stated to contain 84 words, Roth's
edition has only 83. Yaska explains every word of the fourth and fifth
chapters of the Nighontu. -His evidence is therefore particularly valuable

for a critical edition of the fourth and fifth chapters. He gives ¥THTW:
in its proper place and explains it. Both the recensions agree in reading
vv«4IW; between "EHWTN; and sf*£«4;, and the testimony of Devaraja and
Yaska supports this reading 'The omission' in Roth's edition is thus
evidently due to an oversight.

The evidence of Yaska on the fourth and fifth chapters of the Nighantu
indicates that he follows the longer recension. Thus in IV. 1 the shorter

recension gives &f8T:, but Väska reads &f8&W, which is also the reading of
the longer recension. Again < , which is omitted by the shorter recension,

is explained by Yaska. In IV. 2 Ta: is omitted by the shorter recension, but
not by Yaska. Devar&ja has also followed the longer recension, and this
choice seems to be followed by a long line of commentators, and is also, as
Devaraja says, supported by an unbroken tradition in his own family. The
shorter recension has undoubtedly preserved the original form of the text,
at least towards the end of the sections, but the weighty testimony of
'aska is against it. I have therefore given the text and the order in
which the words occur in accordance with the longer recension, though at
the end of every section I have placed side by side the text of both -
recensions.

९. Bib. Ind. edition of the Nighantu.

Samaérami's edition of the Nighantu is useful, for besides publishing
the commentary of Devargja Yajvan it supplies a much larger number of
various readings than Roth. But it suffers from the one defect of present-
ing only Devarija's reading of the text of the Nighantu. The commentary
of Devarija, however valuable as giving the various readings of the
manuseripts of his time, cannot be made the sole basis of an edition of
the Nighantu. Moreover, occasionally the text in this edition contains
words which are not justified either by the evidence of the manuscripts of

' This was admitted, and later on rectified by Roth himself,

 

