10 INTRODUCTION TO THE NIGHANTU

figure in the body of the explanation, as II गोत्रित्येकविंशति: पृथिव्या: ॥. This
is most clearly seen in the sections containing verbs, for instance, in see. 16
of the first chapter, all the stages appear very clearly :

८. द्युमदिति ॥ १६॥ W I, Wo.

b. f ॥ ११॥ १६॥ ) २, M 3, W 3.

E; घुमक्खिकग्ट्श ज्वलतिकमाण: ॥ १६॥ Manuseripts of longer recension.

From the verbs the process was extended by analogy to nouns, perhaps
in imitation of Yaska's own words or for the sake of parallelism,

was also introduced. Last of all came the summary and the
statement of the sections in every chapter.

Yaska's deseription of the Nighaontu | Semammayah Sumamuatah | Sw
vyakhyatuvryah ^ N. l. 1.1-and taking into consideration the fact that in
some cases, like that of Nighantu II. 6, 8, 11, te., his only explanation is
that a particular word has so many synonyms-suits the shorter recension
better, for in the case of the longer recension such an explanation is super-
fluous. NWighantu II. 11, the shorter recension reads @t, while
the longer has: शङ्खारर्गेति नव गोनामानि, 90 only explanation
(N. 8. 9) is: गोनग्मग्न्युंत्तराक्कुण नव. To call this the explanation of the
longer recension is absurd, while in the case of the shorter recension it may
he accepted as an explanation to a certain extent.

c. Devariaja and his commentary.

Devarajayajvan explains every single word of the Nighartu ; his com-
mentary therefore is valuable, for it shows the state of the Nighantu in his
day. - Moreover, in the introduction to his Commentary, he gives a general
description of the many manuscripts of the Nighantuw known to him. He

says: तेषु च केषुचिदयेषु लेखकप्रमादादिमि: कानिचित्पदाव्यधिकान्यासन् । अन्येषु च
। अपरेषु च कानिचिदपहाय कानिचित् विश्रस्तानि । अक्षराणि च
विपर्यस्तानि । एवं व्याकीर्णेषु कोशेषु नियमेकभूतस्य प्रतिपदनिर्वैचननियसप्रदर्शनपरस्य
वांस्यचिद् व्याख्यानस्याभावात् काण्डमुत्सन्नप्रायमासीत् ।

He has attempted to supply a critical edition, for he says that Yaska
explained 150 words of the Naighunrtuka Kondo, and Skandasvami, in
his commentary on Väska, added some more, bringing the total to 200, so
the evidence of Yaskn and Skandasvami was very valuable for these 200
words. About the "९05 )6 ऽऽ: अन्येषां च पदानामस्मत् कुले समामस्नाया-
ध्ययनस्याविच्छेदात्-श्रीवेङ्कटाचार्यतनयस्य माधवस्य भाष्यकृतौ नामानुक्रमण्या आख्या-
तानुक्रमण्या: स्वरानुक्रमण्या निपातानुक्रमण्या निर्बन्धामुक्रमण्यास्तदीयस्य भाष्यस्य च

बहुपा: पयालोचनात् वहुदेशसमानीतात् वहुकोशनिरोक्षणाञ्च पाठ: संशोघित: ।

 

